\noindent
\textbf{Nicholas Russo} holds active CCIE certifications in Routing and
Switching and Service Provider, as well as CCDE. Nick authored a comprehensive
study guide for the CCIE Service Provider version 4 examination and this
document provides updates to the written test for all CCIE/CCDE tracks. Nick
also holds a Bachelor’s of Science in Computer Science, from the Rochester
Institute of Technology (RIT) and is a frequent programmer in the field of
network automation. Nick lives in Maryland, USA with his wife, Carla, and
daughter, Olivia. For updates to this document and Nick’s other professional
publications, please follow the author on his
\href{https://twitter.com/nickrusso42518}{Twitter},
\href{https://www.linkedin.com/in/njrusmc}{LinkedIn}, and
\href{http://njrusmc.net}{personal website}. \\

    \begin{minipage}[t]{\linewidth}
	  \centering
      \includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth]{\imgpath header.png}
    \end{minipage}

\textbf{Technical Reviewers:}
\href{https://twitter.com/ipmess}{Angelos Vassiliou},
\href{https://twitter.com/iosxrqna}{Leonid Danilov}, and many from the
\href{https://www.meetup.com/routergods}{RouterGods} team. \\

This material is not sponsored or endorsed by Cisco Systems, Inc. Cisco, Cisco
Systems, CCIE and the CCIE Logo are trademarks of Cisco Systems, Inc. and its
affiliates. All Cisco products, features, or technologies mentioned in this
document are trademarks of Cisco. This includes, but is not limited to, Cisco
IOS, Cisco IOS-XE, and Cisco IOS-XR. The information herein is provided on an
"as is" basis, without any warranties or representations, express, implied or
statutory, including without limitation, warranties of noninfringement,
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. \\

\textbf{Author’s Notes}
This book is designed for the CCIE and CCDE certification tracks that
introduce the "Evolving Technologies" section of the blueprint for the written
qualification exam. It is not specific to any certification track and provides
an overview of the three key evolving technologies: Cloud, Network
Programmability, and Internet of Things (IoT). \textit{Italic} text represents
cited text from another not created by the author. This is typically directly
from a Cisco document, which is appropriate given that this is a summary of
Cisco’s vision on the topics therein. This book is not an official
publication, does not have an ISBN assigned, and is not protected by any
copyright. It is not for sale and is intended for free, unrestricted
distribution. The opinions expressed in this study guide belong to the author
and do not necessarily represent those of Cisco. \\

This book costs the author's personal money to pay for software used in the
book's demonstrations. If you like the book and want to help support its
continued success, please consider donating
\href{https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=_donations&business=KA9QZVDMVYN26&lc=US&item_name=Evolving%20Technology%20Study%20Guide&item_number=42518&currency_code=USD&bn=PP%2dDonationsBF%3abtn_donate_LG%2egif%3aNonHosted}{here}.
